not absolutely inconsistent with the general tenor of this kind of
remedy; this remedy, which, as we have shown previously, is _not_ for
the purpose of healing diseases, but of fighting the unhappiness of
that depression, the alleviation and deadening of which was its object.
The object was consequently achieved. The keynote by which the ascetic
priest was enabled to get every kind of agonising and ecstatic music
to play on the fibres of the human soul--was, as every one knows, the
exploitation of the feeling of "_guilt_." I have already indicated in
the previous essay the origin of this feeling--as a piece of animal
psychology and nothing else: we were thus confronted with the
feeling of "guilt," in its crude state, as it were. It was first in
the hands of the priest, real artist that he was in the feeling of
guilt, that it took shape--oh, what a shape! "Sin"--for that is the
name of the new priestly version of the animal "bad-conscience" (the
inverted cruelty)--has up to the present been the greatest event in the
history of the diseased soul: in "sin" we find the most perilous and
fatal masterpiece of religious interpretation. Imagine man, suffering
from himself, some way or other but at any rate physiologically,
perhaps like an animal shut up in a cage, not clear as to the why and
the wherefore! imagine him in his desire for reasons--reasons bring
relief--in his desire again for remedies, narcotics at last, consulting
one, who knows even the occult--and see, lo and behold, he gets a hint
from his wizard, the ascetic priest, his _first_ hint on the "cause" of
his trouble: he must search for it in _himself_, in his guiltiness, in
a piece of the past, he must understand his very suffering as a _state
of punishment_. He has heard, he has understood, has the unfortunate:
he is now in the plight of a hen round which a line has been drawn. He
never gets out of the circle of lines. The sick man has been turned
into "the sinner"--and now for a few thousand years we never get away
from the sight of this new invalid, of "a sinner"--shall we ever get
away from it?--wherever we just look, everywhere the hypnotic gaze of
the sinner always moving in one direction (in the direction of guilt,
the _only_ cause of suffering); everywhere the evil conscience, this
"_greuliche thier_,"[4] to use Luther's language; everywhere rumination
over the past, a distorted view of action, the gaze of the "green-eyed
monster" turned on all action; everywhere the wilful misunderstanding
of suffering, its transvaluation into feelings of guilt, fear of
retribution; everywhere the scourge, the hairy shirt, the starving
body, contrition; everywhere the sinner breaking himself on the ghastly
wheel of a restless and morbidly eager conscience; everywhere mute
pain, extreme fear, the agony of a tortured heart, the spasms of an
unknown happiness, the shriek for "redemption." In point of fact,
thanks to this system of procedure, the old depression, dullness,
and fatigue were absolutely conquered, life itself became _very_
interesting again, awake, eternally awake, sleepless, glowing, burnt
away, exhausted and yet not tired--such was the figure cut by man,
"the sinner," who was initiated into these mysteries. This grand old
wizard of an ascetic priest fighting with depression--he had clearly
triumphed, _his_ kingdom had come: men no longer grumbled at pain, men
_panted_ after pain: "_More pain!_ More pain!" So for centuries on end
shrieked the demand of his acolytes and initiates. Every emotional
excess which hurt; everything which broke, overthrew, crushed,