method can and does pave the way to all kinds of mental disturbances,
for instance, "inner lights" (as far as the case of the Hesychasts of
Mount Athos), auditory and visual hallucinations, voluptuous ecstasies
and effervescences of sensualism (the history of St. Theresa). The
explanation of such events given by the victims is always the acme of
fanatical falsehood; this is self-evident. Note well, however, the tone
of implicit gratitude that rings in the very _will_ for an explanation
of such a character. The supreme state, salvation itself, that final
goal of universal hypnosis and peace, is always regarded by them as
the mystery of mysteries, which even the most supreme symbols are
inadequate to express; it is regarded as an entry and homecoming to the
essence of things, as a liberation from all illusions, as "knowledge,"
as "truth," as "being" as an escape from every end, every wish, every
action, as something even beyond Good and Evil.
"Good and Evil," quoth the Buddhists, "both are fetters. The perfect
man is master of them both."
"The done and the undone," quoth the disciple of the Vedanta, "do
him no hurt; the good and the evil he shakes from off him, sage that
he is; his kingdom suffers no more from any act; good and evil, he
goes beyond them both."--An absolutely Indian conception, as much
Brahmanist as Buddhist. Neither in the Indian nor in the Christian
doctrine is this "Redemption" regarded as attainable by means of
virtue and moral improvement, however high they may place the value of
the hypnotic efficiency of virtue: keep clear on this point--indeed
it simply corresponds with the facts. The fact that they remained
_true_ on this point is perhaps to be regarded as the best specimen
of realism in the three great religions, absolutely soaked as they
are with morality, with this one exception. "For those who know,
there is no duty." "Redemption is not attained by the acquisition of
virtues; for redemption consists in being one with Brahman, who is
incapable of acquiring any perfection; and equally little does it
consist in the _giving up of faults_, for the Brahman, unity with whom
is what constitutes redemption, is eternally pure" (these passages
are from the Commentaries of the Cankara, quoted from the first real
European _expert_ of the Indian philosophy, my friend Paul Deussen).
We wish, therefore, to pay honour to the idea of "redemption" in
the great religions, but it is somewhat hard to remain serious in
view of the appreciation meted out to the _deep sleep_ by these
exhausted pessimists who are too tired even to dream--to the deep
sleep considered, that is, as already a fusing into Brahman, as the
attainment of the _unio mystica_ with God. "When he has completely gone
to sleep," says on this point the oldest and most venerable "script,"
"and come to perfect rest, so that he sees no more any vision, then,
oh dear one, is he united with Being, he has entered into his own
self--encircled by the Self with its absolute knowledge, he has no
more any consciousness of that which is without or of that which is
within. Day and night cross not these bridges, nor age, nor death,
nor suffering, nor good deeds, nor evil deeds." "In deep sleep," say
similarly the believers in this deepest of the three great religions,
"does the soul lift itself from out this body of ours, enters the
supreme light and stands out therein in its true shape: therein is it
the supreme spirit itself, which travels about, while it jests and