triumphed, _his_ kingdom had come: men no longer grumbled at pain, men
_panted_ after pain: "_More pain!_ More pain!" So for centuries on end
shrieked the demand of his acolytes and initiates. Every emotional
excess which hurt; everything which broke, overthrew, crushed,
transported, ravished; the mystery of torture-chambers, the ingenuity
of hell itself--all this was now discovered, divined, exploited, all
this was at the service of the wizard, all this served to promote the
triumph of his ideal, the ascetic ideal. "_My kingdom is not of this
world_," quoth he, both at the beginning and at the end: had he still
the right to talk like that?--Goethe has maintained that there are only
thirty-six tragic situations: we would infer from that, did we not know
otherwise, that Goethe was no ascetic priest. He--knows more.
So far as all _this_ kind of priestly medicine-mongering, the "guilty"
kind, is concerned, every word of criticism is superfluous. As for the
suggestion that emotional excess of the type, which in these cases
the ascetic priest is fain to order to his sick patients (under the
most sacred euphemism, as is obvious, and equally impregnated with
the sanctity of his purpose), has ever really been of use to any sick
man, who, forsooth, would feel inclined to maintain a proposition of
that character? At any rate, some understanding should be come to as
to the expression "be of use." If you only wish to express that such a
system of treatment has _reformed_ man, I do not gainsay it: I merely
add that "reformed" conveys to my mind as much as "tamed," "weakened,"
"discouraged," "refined," "daintified," "emasculated" (and thus it
means almost as much as injured). But when you have to deal principally
with sick, depressed, and oppressed creatures, such a system, even
granted that it makes the ill "better," under any circumstances also
makes them more _ill_: ask the mad-doctors the invariable result of a
methodical application of penance-torture, contrition, and salvation
ecstasies. Similarly ask history. In every body politic where the
ascetic priest has established this treatment of the sick, disease has
on every occasion spread with sinister speed throughout its length
and breadth. What was always the "result"? A shattered nervous system,
in addition to the existing malady, and this in the greatest as in the
smallest, in the individuals as in masses. We find, in consequence of
the penance and redemption-training, awful epileptic epidemics, the
greatest known to history, such as the St. Vitus and St. John dances
of the Middle Ages; we find, as another phase of its after-effect,
frightful mutilations and chronic depressions, by means of which the
temperament of a nation or a city (Geneva, Bale) is turned once for
all into its opposite;--this _training_, again, is responsible for
the witch-hysteria, a phenomenon analogous to somnambulism (eight
great epidemic outbursts of this only between 1564 and 1605);--we
find similarly in its train those delirious death-cravings of large
masses, whose awful "shriek," "_evviva la morte!_" was heard over the
whole of Europe, now interrupted by voluptuous variations and anon by
a rage for destruction, just as the same emotional sequence with the
same intermittencies and sudden changes is now universally observed
in every case where the ascetic doctrine of sin scores once more a
great success (religious neurosis _appears_ as a manifestation of the
devil, there is no doubt of it. What is it? _Quæritur_). Speaking
generally, the ascetic ideal and its sublime-moral cult, this most
ingenious, reckless, and perilous systematisation of all methods of
emotional excess, is writ large in a dreadful and unforgettable fashion