nature, and history; and in so far as he asserts the existence of that
different world, come, must he not similarly repudiate its counterpart,
this world, _our_ world? The belief on which our faith in science is
based has remained to this day a metaphysical belief--even we knowers
of to-day, we godless foes of metaphysics, we too take our fire from
that conflagration which was kindled by a thousand-year-old faith,
from that Christian belief, which was also Plato's belief, the belief
that God is truth, that truth is _divine_.... But what if this belief
becomes more and more incredible, what if nothing proves itself to
be divine, unless it be error, blindness, lies--what if God, Himself
proved Himself to be our _oldest lie_?"--It is necessary to stop at
this point and to consider the situation carefully. Science itself now
_needs_ a justification (which is not for a minute to say that there
is such a justification). Turn in this context to the most ancient and
the most modern philosophers: they all fail to realise the extent of
the need of a justification on the part of the Will for Truth--here
is a gap in every philosophy--what is it caused by? Because up to the
present the ascetic ideal dominated all philosophy, because Truth was
fixed as Being, as God, as the Supreme Court of Appeal, because Truth
was not allowed to be a problem. Do you understand this "allowed"?
From the minute that the belief in the God of the ascetic ideal is
repudiated, there exists _a new problem_: the problem of the value of
truth. The Will for Truth needed a critique--let us define by these
words our own task---the value of truth is tentatively _to be called
in question_.... (If this seems too laconically expressed, I recommend
the reader to peruse again that passage from the _Joyful Wisdom_ which
bears the title, "How far we also are still pious," Aph. 344, and best
of all the whole fifth book of that work, as well as the Preface to
_The Dawn of Day_.)
No! You can't get round me with science, when I search for the natural
antagonists of the ascetic ideal, when I put the question: "_Where_
is the opposed will in which the _opponent ideal_ expresses itself?"
Science is not, by a long way, independent enough to fulfil this
function; in every department science needs an ideal value, a power
which creates values, and in whose _service_ it _can believe_ in itself
--science itself never creates values. Its relation to the ascetic
ideal is not in itself antagonistic; speaking roughly, it rather
represents the progressive force in the inner evolution of that ideal.
Tested more exactly, its opposition and antagonism are concerned not
with the ideal itself, but only with that ideal's outworks, its outer
garb, its masquerade, with its temporary hardening, stiffening, and
dogmatising--it makes the life in the ideal free once more, while it
repudiates its superficial elements. These two phenomena, science and
the ascetic ideal, both rest on the same basis––I have already made
this clear––the basis, I say, oft the same over-appreciation of truth
(more accurately the same belief in the _impossibility_ of valuing and
of criticising truth), and consequently they are _necessarily_ allies,
so that, in the event of their being attacked, they must always be
attacked and called into question together. A valuation of the ascetic
ideal inevitably entails a valuation of science as well; lose no time
in seeing this clearly, and be sharp to catch it! (_Art_, I am speaking