The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Genealogy of Morals
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.
Title: The Genealogy of Morals
Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche
Translator: J. M. Kennedy
Horace Barnett Samuel
Release date: June 13, 2016 [eBook #52319]
Most recently updated: October 23, 2024
Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/52319
Credits: Produced by Marc D'Hooghe (Images generously made available by the Hathi Trust.)
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS ***
THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS
PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES (FRAGMENT)
EDINBURGH: AND LONDON
EDITOR'S NOTE.
In 1887, with the view of amplifying and completing certain new
doctrines which he had merely sketched in _Beyond Good and Evil_
(see especially aphorism 260), Nietzsche published _The Genealogy of
Morals_. This work is perhaps the least aphoristic, in form, of all
Nietzsche's productions. For analytical power, more especially in those
parts where Nietzsche examines the ascetic ideal, _The Genealogy of
Morals_ is unequalled by any other of his works; and, in the light
which it throws upon the attitude of the ecclesiast to the man of
resentment and misfortune, it is one of the most valuable contributions
to sacerdotal psychology.
FIRST ESSAY. "GOOD AND EVIL," "GOOD AND BAD"
SECOND ESSAY. "GUILT," "BAD CONSCIENCE," AND THE LIKE
THIRD ESSAY. WHAT IS THE MEANING OF ASCETIC IDEALS?
PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES. Translated by J. M. Kennedy
We are unknown, we knowers, ourselves to ourselves: this has its own
good reason. We have never searched for ourselves--how should it then
come to pass, that we should ever _find_ ourselves? Rightly has it been
said: "Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." _Our_
treasure is there, where stand the hives of our knowledge. It is to
those hives that we are always striving; as born creatures of flight,
and as the honey-gatherers of the spirit, we care really in our hearts
only for one thing--to bring something "home to the hive!"
As far as the rest of life with its so-called "experiences" is
concerned, which of us has even sufficient serious interest? or
sufficient time? In our dealings with such points of life, we are, I
fear, never properly to the point; to be precise, our heart is not
there, and certainly not our ear. Rather like one who, delighting
in a divine distraction, or sunken in the seas of his own soul, in
whose ear the clock has just thundered with all its force its twelve
strokes of noon, suddenly wakes up, and asks himself, "What has in
point of fact just struck?" so do we at times rub afterwards, as it
were, our puzzled ears, and ask in complete astonishment and complete
embarrassment, "Through what have we in point of fact just lived?"
further, "Who are we in point of fact?" and count, _after they have
struck_, as I have explained, all the twelve throbbing beats of the
clock of our experience, of our life, of our being--ah!--and count
wrong in the endeavour. Of necessity we remain strangers to ourselves,
we understand ourselves not, in ourselves we are bound to be mistaken,