peculiar to the æsthetic state, springing directly from the ingredient
of sensuality (just as that "idealism" which is peculiar to girls at
puberty originates in the same source)--it may be, consequently, that
sensuality is not removed by the approach of the æsthetic state, as
Schopenhauer believed, but merely becomes transfigured, and ceases to
enter into the consciousness as sexual excitement. (I shall return once
again to this point in connection with the more delicate problems of
the _physiology of the æsthetic_, a subject which up to the present has
been singularly untouched and unelucidated.)
A certain asceticism, a grimly gay whole-hearted renunciation, is, as
we have seen, one of the most favourable conditions for the highest
intellectualism, and, consequently, for the most natural corollaries
of such intellectualism: we shall therefore be proof against any
surprise at the philosophers in particular always treating the ascetic
ideal with a certain amount of predilection. A serious historical
investigation shows the bond between the ascetic ideal and philosophy
to be still much tighter and still much stronger. It may be said that
it was only in the _leading strings_ of this ideal that philosophy
really learnt to make its first steps and baby paces--alas how
clumsily, alas how crossly, alas how ready to tumble down and lie on
its stomach was this shy little darling of a brat with its bandy legs!
The early history of philosophy is like that of all good things;--for a
long time they had not the courage to be themselves, they kept always
looking round to see if no one would come to their help; further, they
were afraid of all who looked at them. Just enumerate in order the
particular tendencies and virtues of the philosopher--his tendency to
doubt, his tendency to deny, his tendency to wait (to be "ephectic"),
his tendency to analyse, search, explore, dare, his tendency to compare
and to equalise, his will to be neutral and objective, his will for
everything which is "_sine ira et studio_":--has it yet been realised
that for quite a lengthy period these tendencies went counter to the
first claims of morality and conscience? (To say nothing at all of
_Reason_, which even Luther chose to call _Frau Klüglin_,[2] the sly
whore.) Has it been yet appreciated that a philosopher, in the event
of his _arriving_ at self-consciousness, must needs feel himself an
incarnate "nitimur in vetitum"--and consequently guard himself against
"his own sensations," against self-consciousness? It is, I repeat, just
the same with all good things, on which we now pride ourselves; even
judged by the standard of the ancient Greeks, our whole modern life,
in so far as it is not weakness, but power and the consciousness of
power, appears pure "Hybris" and godlessness: for the things which are
the very reverse of those which we honour to-day, have had for a long
time conscience on their side, and God as their guardian. "Hybris"
is our whole attitude to nature nowadays, our violation of nature
with the help of machinery, and all the unscrupulous ingenuity of our
scientists and engineers. "Hybris" is our attitude to God, that is, to
some alleged teleological and ethical spider behind the meshes of the
great trap of the causal web. Like Charles the Bold in his war with
Louis the Eleventh, we may say, "je combats l'universelle araignée";
"Hybris" is our attitude to ourselves--for we experiment with ourselves
in a way that we would not allow with any animal, and with pleasure
and curiosity open our soul in our living body: what matters now to