instrument of torture. He apprehends in God the most extreme antitheses
that he can find to his own characteristic and ineradicable animal
instincts, he himself gives a new interpretation to these animal
instincts as being against what he "owes" to God (as enmity, rebellion,
and revolt against the "Lord," the "Father," the "Sire," the "Beginning
of the world"), he places himself between the horns of the dilemma,
"God" and "Devil." Every negation which he is inclined to utter to
himself, to the nature, naturalness, and reality of his being, he
whips into an ejaculation of "yes," uttering it as something existing,
living, efficient, as being God, as the holiness of God, the judgment
of God, as the hangmanship of God, as transcendence, as eternity, as
unending torment, as hell, as infinity of punishment and guilt. This is
a kind of madness of the will in the sphere of psychological cruelty
which is absolutely unparalleled:--man's _will_ to find himself guilty
and blameworthy to the point of inexpiability, his _will_ to think of
himself as punished, without the punishment ever being able to balance
the guilt, his _will_ to infect and to poison the fundamental basis
of the universe with the problem of punishment and guilt, in order to
cut off once and for all any escape out of this labyrinth of "fixed
ideas," his will for rearing an ideal--that of the "holy God"--face to
face with which he can have tangible proof of his own un-worthiness.
Alas for this mad melancholy beast man! What phantasies invade it,
what paroxysms of perversity, hysterical senselessness, and _mental
bestiality_ break out immediately, at the very slightest check on its
being the beast of action. All this is excessively interesting, but
at the same time tainted with a black, gloomy, enervating melancholy,
so that a forcible veto must be invoked against looking too long into
these abysses. Here is _disease_, undubitably, the most ghastly disease
that has as yet played havoc among men: and he who can still hear (but
man turns now deaf ears to such sounds), how in this night of torment
and nonsense there has rung out the cry of _love_, the cry of the most
passionate ecstasy, of redemption in _love_, he turns away gripped by
an invincible horror--in man there is so much that is ghastly--too long
has the world been a mad-house.
Let this suffice once for all concerning the origin of the "holy God."
The fact that _in itself_ the conception of gods is not bound to
lead necessarily to this degradation of the imagination (a temporary
representation of whose vagaries we felt bound give), the fact that
there exist nobler methods of utilising the invention of gods than in
this self-crucifixion and self-degradation of man, in which the last
two thousand years of Europe have been past masters--these facts can
fortunately be still perceived from every glance that we cast at the
Grecian gods, these mirrors of noble and grandiose men, in which the
_animal_ in man felt itself deified, and did _not_ devour itself in
subjective frenzy. These Greeks long utilised their gods as simple
buffers against the "bad conscience"--so that they could continue
to enjoy their freedom of soul: this, of course, is diametrically
opposed to Christianity's theory of its god. They went _very far_ on
this principle, did these splendid and lion-hearted children; and
there is no lesser authority than that of the Homeric Zeus for making
them realise occasionally that they are taking life too casually.
"Wonderful," says he on one occasion--it has to do with the case of