continue to act her old part for fifty years more; the impossibility
of shutting out _homines novi_ from the government will ruin her, and
her continual change of political parties is a fatal obstacle to the
carrying out of any tasks which require to be spread out over a long
period of time. A man must to-day be a soldier first and foremost that
he may not afterwards lose his credit as a merchant. Enough; here,
as in other matters, the coming century will be found following in
the footsteps of Napoleon--the first man, and the man of greatest
initiative and advanced views, of modern times. For the tasks of the
next century, the methods of popular representation and parliaments are
the most inappropriate imaginable.
The condition of Europe in the next century will once again lead to the
breeding of manly virtues, because men will live in continual danger.
Universal military service is already the curious antidote which we
possess for the effeminacy of democratic ideas, and it has grown up out
of the struggle of the nations. (Nation--men who speak one language
and read the same newspapers. These men now call themselves "nations,"
and would far too readily trace their descent from the same source and
through the same history; which, however, even with the assistance of
the most malignant lying in the past, they have not succeeded in
doing.)
What quagmires and mendacity must there be about if it is possible,
in the modern European hotch-potch, to raise questions of "race"! (It
being premised that the origin of such writers is not in Horneo and
Borneo.)
Maxim: To associate with no man who takes any part in the mendacious
race swindle.
With the freedom of travel now existing, groups of men of the same
kindred can join together and establish communal habits and customs.
The overcoming of "nations."
To make Europe a centre of culture, national stupidities should not
make us blind to the fact that in the higher regions there is already a
continuous reciprocal dependence. France and German philosophy. Richard
Wagner and Paris (1830-50). Goethe and Greece. All things are impelled
towards, a synthesis of the European past in the highest types of mind.
Mankind has still much before it--how, generally speaking, could
the ideal be taken from the past? Perhaps merely in relation to the
present, which latter is possibly a lower region.
This is our distrust, which recurs again and again; our care, which
never lets us sleep; our question, which no one listens to or wishes
to listen to; our Sphinx, near which there is more than one precipice:
we believe that the men of present-day Europe are deceived in regard
to the things which we love best, and a pitiless demon (no, not
pitiless, only indifferent and puerile)--plays with our hearts and
their enthusiasm, as it may perhaps have already played with everything
that lived and loved; I believe that everything which we Europeans
of to-day are in the habit of admiring as the values of all these
respected things called "humanity," "mankind," "sympathy," "pity," may
be of some value as the debilitation and moderating of certain powerful
and dangerous primitive impulses. Nevertheless, in the long run all
these things are nothing else than the belittlement of the entire type
"man," his mediocrisation, if in such a desperate situation I may make
use of such a desperate expression. I think that the commedia umana for
an epicurean spectator-god must consist in this: that the Europeans, by
virtue of their growing morality, believe in all their innocence and