in them?—The thing itself, I repeat, the concept thing was merely a
reflex of the belief in the ego as cause. And even your atom, my dear
good Mechanists and Physicists, what an amount of error, of rudimentary
psychology still adheres to it!—Not to speak of the “thing-in-itself,”
of the _horrendum pudendum_ of the metaphysicians! The error of spirit
regarded as a cause, confounded with reality! And made the measure of
reality! And called _God!_
_The Error of imaginary Causes._ Starting out from dreamland, we
find that to any definite sensation, like that produced by a distant
cannon shot for instance, we are wont to ascribe a cause after the
fact (very often quite a little romance in which the dreamer himself
is, of course, the hero). Meanwhile the sensation becomes protracted
like a sort of continuous echo, until, as it were, the instinct of
causality allows it to come to the front rank, no longer however as a
chance occurrence, but as a thing which has some meaning. The cannon
shot presents itself in a _causal_ manner, by means of an apparent
reversal in the order of time. That which occurs last, the motivation,
is experienced first, often with a hundred details which flash past
like lightning, and the shot is the _result._ What has happened? The
ideas suggested by a particular state of our senses, are misinterpreted
as the cause of that state. As a matter of fact we proceed in precisely
the same manner when we are awake. The greater number of our general
sensations—every kind of obstacle, pressure, tension, explosion in
the interplay of the organs, and more particularly the condition of
the _nervus sympathies_—stimulate our instinct of causality: we will
have a reason which will account for our feeling thus or thus,—for
feeling ill or well. We are never satisfied by merely ascertaining
the fact that we feel thus or thus: we admit this fact—we become
conscious of it—only when we have attributed it to some kind of
motivation. Memory, which, in such circumstances unconsciously becomes
active, adduces former conditions of a like kind, together with the
causal interpretations with which they are associated,—but not their
real cause. The belief that the ideas, the accompanying processes
of consciousness, have been the causes, is certainly produced by
the agency of memory. And in this way we become _accustomed_ to a
particular interpretation of causes which, truth to tell, actually
hinders and even utterly prevents the investigation of the proper
cause.
_The Psychological Explanation of the above Fact._ To trace something
unfamiliar back to something familiar, is at once a relief, a comfort
and a satisfaction, while it also produces a feeling of power. The
unfamiliar involves danger, anxiety and care,—the fundamental instinct
is to get rid of these painful circumstances. First principle: any
explanation is better than none at all. Since, at bottom, it is
only a question of shaking one’s self free from certain oppressive
ideas, the means employed to this end are not selected with overmuch
punctiliousness: the first idea by means of which the unfamiliar is
revealed as familiar, produces a feeling of such comfort that it is
“held to be true.” The proof of happiness (“of power”) as the criterion
of truth. The instinct of causality is therefore conditioned and
stimulated by the feeling of fear. Whenever possible, the question
“why?” should not only educe the cause as cause, but rather a certain
kind of cause—a comforting, liberating and reassuring cause. The first
result of this need is that something known or already experienced, and