is only a word.[1] Very much later, in a world a thousand times more
enlightened, the assurance, the subjective certitude, in the handling
of the categories of reason came into the minds of philosophers as a
surprise. They concluded that these categories could not be derived
from experience,—on the contrary, the whole of experience rather
contradicts them. _Whence do they come therefore?_ In India, as in
Greece, the same mistake was made: “we must already once have lived
in a higher world (—instead of in a much lower one, which would have
been the truth!), we must have been divine, for we possess reason!”
... Nothing indeed has exercised a more simple power of persuasion
hitherto than the error of Being, as it was formulated by the Eleatics
for instance: in its favour are every word and every sentence that we
utter!—Even the opponents of the Eleatics succumbed to the seductive
powers of their concept of Being. Among others there was Democritus in
his discovery of the atom. “Reason” in language!—oh what a deceptive
old witch it has been! I fear we shall never be rid of God, so long as
we still believe in grammar.
People will feel grateful to me if I condense a point of view, which
is at once so important and so new, into four theses: by this means
I shall facilitate comprehension, and shall likewise challenge
contradiction.
_Proposition One._ The reasons upon which the apparent nature of “this”
world have been based, rather tend to prove its reality,—any other
kind of reality defies demonstration.
_Proposition Two._ The characteristics with which man has endowed
the “true Being” of things, are the characteristics of non-Being, of
_nonentity._ The “true world” has been erected upon a contradiction of
the real world; and it is indeed an apparent world, seeing that it is
merely a _moralo-optical_ delusion.
_Proposition Three._ There is no sense in spinning yarns about another
world, provided, of course, that we do not possess a mighty instinct
which urges us to slander, belittle, and cast suspicion upon this life:
in this case we should be avenging ourselves on this life with the
phantasmagoria of “another,” of a “better” life.
_Proposition Four._ To divide the world into a “true” and an “apparent”
world, whether after the manner of Christianity or of Kant (after all
a Christian in disguise), is only a sign of decadence,—a symptom of
_degenerating_ life. The fact that the artist esteems the appearance
of a thing higher than reality, is no objection to this statement. For
“appearance” signifies once more reality here, but in a selected,
strengthened and corrected form. The tragic artist is no pessimist,—he
says _Yea_ to everything questionable and terrible, he is Dionysian.
[1] Nietzsche here refers to the concept “free will” of the Christians;
this does not mean that there is no such thing as will—that is to say
a powerful determining force from within.—TR.
HOW THE “TRUE WORLD” ULTIMATELY BECAME A FABLE
1. The true world, attainable to the sage, the pious man and the man of
virtue,—he lives in it, _he is it._
(The most ancient form of the idea was relatively clever,
simple, convincing. It was a paraphrase of the proposition
“I, Plato, am the truth.”)
2. The true world which is unattainable for the moment, is promised to
the sage, to the pious man and to the man of virtue (“to the sinner who
repents”).
(Progress of the idea: it becomes more subtle, more
insidious, more evasive,—It _becomes a woman,_ it becomes
Christian.)
3. The true world is unattainable, it cannot be proved, it cannot