the sage, to the pious man and to the man of virtue (“to the sinner who
repents”).
(Progress of the idea: it becomes more subtle, more
insidious, more evasive,—It _becomes a woman,_ it becomes
Christian.)
3. The true world is unattainable, it cannot be proved, it cannot
promise anything; but even as a thought, alone, it is a comfort, an
obligation, a command.
(At bottom this is still the old sun; but seen through mist
and scepticism: the idea has become sublime, pale, northern,
Königsbergian.)[1]
4. The true world—is it unattainable? At all events it is unattained.
And as unattained it is also _unknown._ Consequently it no longer
comforts, nor saves, nor constrains: what could something unknown
constrain us to?
(The grey of dawn. Reason stretches itself and yawns for the
first time. The cock-crow of positivism.)
5. The “true world”—an idea that no longer serves any purpose, that
no longer constrains one to anything,—a useless idea that has become
quite superfluous, consequently an exploded idea: let us abolish it!
(Bright daylight; breakfast; the return of common sense
and of cheerfulness; Plato blushes for shame and all
free-spirits kick up a shindy.)
6. We have suppressed the true world: what world survives? the apparent
world perhaps?... Certainly not! _In abolishing the true world we have
also abolished the world of appearance!_
(Noon; the moment of the shortest shadows; the end of the
longest error; mankind’s zenith; _Incipit Zarathustra._)
[1] Kant was a native of Königsberg and lived there all his life. Did
Nietzsche know that Kant was simply a Scotch Puritan, whose family had
settled in Germany?
MORALITY AS THE ENEMY OF NATURE
There is a time when all passions are simply fatal in their action,
when they wreck their victims with the weight of their folly,—and
there is a later period, a very much later period, when they marry with
the spirit, when they “spiritualise” themselves. Formerly, owing to the
stupidity inherent in passion, men waged war against passion itself:
men pledged themselves to annihilate it,—all ancient moral-mongers
were unanimous on this point, “_il faut tuer les passions._” The
most famous formula for this stands in the New Testament, in that
Sermon on the Mount, where, let it be said incidentally, things are
by no means regarded _from a height._ It is said there, for instance,
with an application to sexuality: “if thy eye offend thee, pluck it
out”: fortunately no Christian acts in obedience to this precept.
To annihilate the passions and desires, simply on account of their
stupidity, and to obviate the unpleasant consequences of their
stupidity, seems to us to-day merely an aggravated form of stupidity.
We no longer admire those dentists who extract teeth simply in order
that they may not ache again. On the other hand, it will be admitted
with some reason, that on the soil from which Christianity grew, the
idea of the “spiritualisation of passion” could not possibly have been
conceived. The early Church, as everyone knows, certainly did wage war
against the “intelligent,” in favour of the “poor in spirit” In these
circumstances how could the passions be combated intelligently? The
Church combats passion by means of excision of all kinds: its practice,
its “remedy,” is _castration._ It never inquires “how can a desire
be spiritualised, beautified, deified?”—In all ages it has laid the
weight of discipline in the process of extirpation (the extirpation
of sensuality, pride, lust of dominion, lust of property, and
revenge).—But to attack the passions at their roots, means attacking
life itself at its source: the method of the Church is hostile to life.