the first and second parts are both signs of a power which is not yet
self-reliant!
With the recovery of Zarathustra, Cæsar stands there inexorable
and kind:—the gulf separating creation, goodness, and wisdom is
annihilated.
Clearness, peace, no exaggerated craving, happiness in the moment which
is properly occupied and immortalised!
Zarathustra, Part III.: “I myself am happy.”—When he had taken leave
of mankind he returned unto himself. Like a cloud it vanishes from him.
The manner in which Superman must live: like an Epicurean God.
Divine suffering is the substance of the third part of Zarathustra. The
human state of the legislator is only brought forward as an example.
His intense love for his friends seems to him a disease,—once more he
becomes peaceful.
When the invitations come he gently evades them.
In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why it is that the
time of the great noon has come: It is really a description of the age
given by means of visits, but interpreted by Zarathustra.
In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why “a chosen
people” has first to be created:—they are the lucky cases of nature
as opposed to the unlucky (exemplified by the visitors): only to them
—the lucky cases—is Zarathustra able to express himself concerning
ultimate problems, them alone is he able to inspire with activity on
behalf of this theory. They are strong, healthy, hard and above all
noble enough for him to give them the hammer with which to remould the
whole world.
The unity in power of the creator, the lover and the knight of
knowledge.
Love alone shall judge—(the creative love which forgets itself in its
work).
Zarathustra can only dispense happiness once the order of rank is
established. Therefore this doctrine must be taught first.
The order of rank develops into a system of earthly dominion: the lords
of the earth come last, a new ruling caste. Here and there there arises
from them a perfectly Epicurean God, a Superman, a transfigurer of
existence.
The Superhuman’s notion of the world. Dionysus. Returning from these
most strange of all pursuits Zarathustra comes back with love to the
narrowest and smallest things,—he blesses all his experiences and dies
with a blessing on his lips.
From people who merely pray we must become people who bless.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS; OR, HOW TO PHILOSOPHIZE WITH THE HAMMER. THE ANTICHRIST ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected