more superabundant sort of life, it might have been called by another
name,—possibly “cowardice,” or “vileness,” or “old woman’s morality.”
... Our mollification of morals—this is my cry; this it you will is
my _innovation_—is the outcome of our decline; conversely hardness
and terribleness in morals may be the result of a surplus of life.
When the latter state prevails, much is dared, much is challenged,
and much is also _squandered_. That which formerly was simply the
salt of life, would now be our _poison_. To be indifferent—even this
is a form of strength—for that, likewise, we are too senile, too
decrepit: our morality of fellow-feeling, against which I was the
first to raise a finger of warning, that which might be called _moral
impressionism_, is one symptom the more of the excessive physiological
irritability which is peculiar to everything decadent. That movement
which attempted to introduce itself in a scientific manner on the
shoulders of Schopenhauer’s morality of pity—a very sad attempt!—is
in its essence the movement of decadence in morality, and as such
it is intimately related to Christian morality. Strong ages and
noble cultures see something contemptible in pity, in the “love of
one’s neighbour,” and in a lack of egoism and of self-esteem.—Ages
should be measured according to their _positive forces_;—valued
by this standard that prodigal and fateful age of the Renaissance,
appears as the last _great_ age, while we moderns with our anxious
care of ourselves and love of our neighbours, with all our unassuming
virtues of industry, equity, and scientific method—with our lust of
collection, of economy and of mechanism—represent a _weak_ age....
Our virtues are necessarily determined, and are even stimulated, by our
weakness. “Equality,” a certain definite process of making everybody
uniform, which only finds its expression in the theory of equal rights,
is essentially bound up with a declining culture: the chasm between
man and man, class and class, the multiplicity of types, the will to
be one’s self, and to distinguish one’s self—that, in fact, which I
call the _pathos of distance_ is proper to all _strong_ ages. The force
of tension,—nay, the tension itself, between extremes grows slighter
every day,—the extremes themselves are tending to become obliterated
to the point of becoming identical. All our political theories and
state constitutions, not by any means excepting “The German Empire,”
are the logical consequences, the necessary consequences of decline;
the unconscious effect of _decadence_ has begun to dominate even the
ideals of the various sciences. My objection to the whole of English
and French sociology still continues to be this, that it knows only
the _decadent form_ of society from experience, and with perfectly
childlike innocence takes the instincts of decline as the norm, the
standard, of sociological valuations. _Descending_ life, the decay
of all organising power—that is to say, of all that power which
separates, cleaves gulfs, and establishes rank above and below,
formulated itself in modern sociology as _the_ ideal. Our socialists
are decadents: but Herbert Spencer was also a _decadent,_—he saw
something to be desired in the triumph of altruism!...
_My Concept of Freedom._—Sometimes the value of a thing does not lie
in that which it helps us to achieve, but in the amount we have to
pay for it,—what it _costs_ us. For instance, liberal institutions
straightway cease from being liberal, the moment they are soundly
established: once this is attained no more grievous and more thorough
enemies of freedom exist than liberal institutions! One knows, of
course, what they bring about: they undermine the Will to Power,