to hear perchance that well-known hollow sound which tells of blown-out
frogs,—what a joy this is for one who has ears even behind his ears,
for an old psychologist and Pied Piper like myself in whose presence
precisely that which would fain be silent, _must betray itself._
Even this treatise—as its title shows—is above all a recreation,
a ray of sunshine, a leap sideways of a psychologist in his leisure
moments. Maybe, too, a new war? And are we again cross-examining new
idols? This little work is a great declaration of war; and with regard
to the cross-examining of idols, this time it is not the idols of the
age but eternal idols which are here struck with a hammer as with
a tuning fork,—there are certainly no idols which are older, more
convinced, and more inflated. Neither are there any more hollow. This
does not alter the fact that they are believed in more than any others,
besides they are never called idols,—at least, not the most exalted
among their number.
TURIN, the 30th _September_ 1888.
on the day when the first
book of the Transvaluation
of all Values was finished.
MAXIMS AND MISSILES
Idleness is the parent of all psychology. What? Is psychology then
a—vice?
Even the pluckiest among us has but seldom the courage of what he
really knows.
Aristotle says that in order to live alone, a man must be either an
animal or a god. The third alternative is lacking: a man must be
both—a _philosopher._
“All truth is simple.”—Is not this a double lie?
Once for all I wish to be blind to many things.—Wisdom sets bounds
even to knowledge.
A man recovers best from his exceptional nature—his
intellectuality—by giving his animal instincts a chance.
Which is it? Is man only a blunder of God? Or is God only a blunder of
man?
_From the military school of life._—That which does not kill me, makes
me stronger.
Help thyself, then everyone will help thee. A principle of
neighbour-love.
A man should not play the coward to his deeds. He should not repudiate
them once he has performed them. Pangs of conscience are indecent.
Can a donkey be tragic?—To perish beneath a load that one can neither
bear nor throw off? This is the case of the Philosopher.
If a man knows the wherefore of his existence, then the manner of it
can take care of itself. Man does not aspire to happiness; only the
Englishman does that.
Man created woman—out of what? Out of a rib of his god,—of his
“ideal.”
What? Art thou looking for something? Thou wouldst fain multiply
thyself tenfold, a hundredfold? Thou seekest followers? Seek ciphers!
Posthumous men, like myself, are not so well understood as men who
reflect their age, but they are heard with more respect. In plain
English: we are never understood—hence our authority.
_Among women._—“Truth? Oh, you do not know truth! Is it not an outrage
on all our _pudeurs?_”—
There is an artist after my own heart, modest in his needs: he really
wants only two things, his bread and his art—_panem et Circem._
He who knows not how to plant his will in things, at least endows them
with some meaning: that is to say, he believes that a will is already
present in them. (A principle of faith.)
What? Ye chose virtue and the heaving breast, and at the same time
ye squint covetously at the advantages of the unscrupulous.—But
with virtue ye renounce all “advantages” ... (to be nailed to an
Antisemite’s door).