things, he thinks everything beautiful that throws his own image back
at him. The judgment “beautiful” is the “vanity of his species.” ...
A little demon of suspicion may well whisper into the sceptic’s ear:
is the world really beautified simply because man thinks it beautiful?
He has only humanised it—that is all. But nothing, absolutely nothing
proves to us that it is precisely man who is the proper model of
beauty. Who knows what sort of figure he would cut in the eyes of a
higher judge of taste? He might seem a little _outré_? perhaps even
somewhat amusing? perhaps a trifle arbitrary? “O Dionysus, thou divine
one, why dost thou pull mine ears?” Ariadne asks on one occasion of
her philosophic lover, during one of those famous conversations on the
island of Naxos. “I find a sort of humour in thine ears, Ariadne: why
are they not a little longer?”
Nothing is beautiful; man alone is beautiful: all æsthetic rests on
this piece of ingenuousness, it is the first axiom of this science.
And now let us straightway add the second to it: nothing is ugly save
the degenerate man,—within these two first principles the realm of
æsthetic judgments is confined. From the physiological standpoint,
everything ugly weakens and depresses man. It reminds him of decay,
danger, impotence; he literally loses strength in its presence. The
effect of ugliness may be gauged by the dynamometer. Whenever man’s
spirits are downcast, it is a sign that he scents the proximity of
something “ugly.” His feeling of power, his will to power, his courage
and his pride—these things collapse at the sight of what is ugly, and
rise at the sight of what is beautiful. In both cases an inference is
drawn; the premises to which are stored with extra ordinary abundance
in the instincts. Ugliness is understood to signify a hint and a
symptom of degeneration: that which reminds us however remotely of
degeneracy, impels us to the judgment “ugly.” Every sign of exhaustion,
of gravity, of age, of fatigue; every kind of constraint, such as
cramp, or paralysis; and above all the smells, colours and forms
associated with decomposition and putrefaction, however much they may
have been attenuated into symbols,—all these things provoke the same
reaction which is the judgment “ugly.” A certain hatred expresses
itself here: what is it that man hates? Without a doubt it is the
_decline of his type._ In this regard his hatred springs from the
deepest instincts of the race: there is horror, caution, profundity and
far-reaching vision in this hatred,—it is the most profound hatred
that exists. On its account alone Art is profound.
_Schopenhauer._—Schopenhauer, the last German who is to be reckoned
with (—who is a European event like Goethe, Hegel, or Heinrich Heine,
and who is not merely local, national), is for a psychologist a case
of the first rank: I mean as a malicious though masterly attempt to
enlist on the side of a general nihilistic depreciation of life, the
very forces which are opposed to such a movement,—that is to say, the
great self-affirming powers of the “will to live,” the exuberant forms
of life itself. He interpreted Art, heroism, genius, beauty, great
sympathy, knowledge, the will to truth, and tragedy, one after the
other, as the results of the denial, or of the need of the denial, of
the “will”—the greatest forgery, Christianity always excepted, which
history has to show. Examined more carefully, he is in this respect
simply the heir of the Christian interpretation; except that he knew