straightway cease from being liberal, the moment they are soundly
established: once this is attained no more grievous and more thorough
enemies of freedom exist than liberal institutions! One knows, of
course, what they bring about: they undermine the Will to Power,
they are the levelling of mountain and valley exalted to a morality,
they make people small, cowardly and pleasure-loving,—by means of
them the gregarious animal invariably triumphs. Liberalism, or, in
plain English, the _transformation of mankind into cattle._ The
same institutions, so long as they are fought for, produce quite
other results; then indeed they promote the cause of freedom quite
powerfully. Regarded more closely, it is war which produces these
results, war in favour of liberal institutions, which, as war, allows
the illiberal instincts to subsist. For war trains men to be free.
What in sooth is freedom? Freedom is the will to be responsible
for ourselves. It is to preserve the distance which separates us
from other men. To grow more indifferent to hardship, to severity,
to privation, and even to life itself. To be ready to sacrifice
men for one’s cause, one’s self included. Freedom denotes that the
virile instincts which rejoice in war and in victory, prevail over
other instincts; for instance, over the instincts of “happiness.”
The man who has won his freedom, and how much more so, therefore,
the spirit that has won its freedom, tramples ruthlessly upon that
contemptible kind of comfort which tea-grocers, Christians, cows,
women, Englishmen and other democrats worship in their dreams. The
free man is a _warrior._—How is freedom measured in individuals
as well as in nations? According to the resistance which has to be
overcome, according to the pains which it costs to remain _uppermost._
The highest type of free man would have to be sought where the
greatest resistance has continually to be overcome: five paces away
from tyranny, on the very threshold of the danger of thraldom. This
is psychologically true if, by the word “Tyrants” we mean inexorable
and terrible instincts which challenge the _maximum_ amount of
authority and discipline to oppose them—the finest example of this
is Julius Cæsar; it is also true politically: just examine the course
of history. The nations which were worth anything, which _got to
be_ worth anything, never attained to that condition under liberal
institutions: _great danger_ made out of them something which deserves
reverence, that danger which alone can make us aware of our resources,
our virtues, our means of defence, our weapons, our _genius,_—which
_compels_ us to be strong. _First_ principle: a man must need to be
strong, otherwise he will never attain it.—Those great forcing-houses
of the strong, of the strongest kind of men that have ever existed on
earth, the aristocratic communities like those of Rome and Venice,
understood freedom precisely as I understand the word: as something
that one has and that one has _not,_ as something that one _will_ have
and that one _seizes by force._
_A Criticism of Modernity._—Our institutions are no longer any good;
on this point we are all agreed. But the fault does not lie with
them; but with _us._ Now that we have lost all the instincts out
of which institutions grow, the latter on their part are beginning
to disappear from our midst because we are no longer fit for them.
Democracy has always been the death agony of the power of organisation:
already in “Human All-too-Human,” Part I., Aph. 472, I pointed out
that modern democracy, together with its half-measures, of which the