stroke I had learned all there was to learn. Condensed, severe, with as
much substance as possible in the background, and with cold but roguish
hostility towards all “beautiful words” and “beautiful feelings”—in
these things I found my own particular bent. In my writings up to my
“Zarathustra,” there will be found a very earnest ambition to attain
to the _Roman_ style, to the “_ære perennius_” in style.—The same
thing happened on my first acquaintance with Horace. Up to the present
no poet has given me the same artistic raptures as those which from
the first I received from an Horatian ode. In certain languages it
would be absurd even to aspire to what is accomplished by this poet.
This mosaic of words, in which every unit spreads its power to the
left and to the right over the whole, by its sound, by its place in
the sentence, and by its meaning, this _minimum_ in the compass and
number of the signs, and the _maximum_ of energy in the signs which is
thereby achieved—all this is Roman, and, if you will believe me, noble
_par excellence._ By the side of this all the rest of poetry becomes
something popular,—nothing more than senseless sentimental twaddle.
I am not indebted to the Greeks for anything like such strong
impressions; and, to speak frankly, they cannot be to us what the
Romans are. One cannot _learn_ from the Greeks—their style is too
strange, it is also too fluid, to be imperative or to have the effect
of a classic. Who would ever have learnt writing from a Greek! Who
would ever have learned it without the Romans!... Do not let anyone
suggest Plato to me. In regard to Plato I am a thorough sceptic, and
have never been able to agree to the admiration of Plato the _artist,_
which is traditional among scholars. And after all, in this matter,
the most refined judges of taste in antiquity are on my side. In my
opinion Plato bundles all the forms of style pell-mell together,
in this respect he is one of the first decadents of style: he has
something similar on his conscience to that which the Cynics had
who invented the _satura Menippea._ For the Platonic dialogue—this
revoltingly self-complacent and childish kind of dialectics—to
exercise any charm over you, you must never have read any good French
authors,—Fontenelle for instance. Plato is boring. In reality my
distrust of Plato is fundamental. I find him so very much astray
from all the deepest instincts of the Hellenes, so steeped in moral
prejudices, so pre-existently Christian—the concept “good” is already
the highest value with him,—that rather than use any other expression
I would prefer to designate the whole phenomenon Plato with the hard
word “superior bunkum,” or, if you would like it better, “idealism.”
Humanity has had to pay dearly for this Athenian having gone to school
among the Egyptians (—or among the Jews in Egypt?...) In the great
fatality of Christianity, Plato is that double-faced fascination
called the “ideal,” which made it possible for the more noble natures
of antiquity to misunderstand themselves and to tread the _bridge_
which led to the “cross.” And what an amount of Plato is still to be
found in the concept “church,” and in the construction, the system
and the practice of the church!—My recreation, my predilection, my
cure, after all Platonism, has always been Thucydides. Thucydides and
perhaps Machiavelli’s _principe_ are most closely related to me owing
to the absolute determination which they show of refusing to deceive