death and change; real life conceived as the collective prolongation
of life through procreation, through the mysteries of sexuality.
To the Greeks, the symbol of sex was the most venerated of symbols,
the really deep significance of all the piety of antiquity. All the
details of the act of procreation, pregnancy and birth gave rise to
the loftiest and most solemn feelings. In the doctrine of mysteries,
_pain_ was pronounced holy: the “pains of childbirth” sanctify pain in
general,—all becoming and all growth, everything that guarantees the
future _involves_ pain.... In order that there may be eternal joy in
creating, in order that the will to life may say Yea to itself in all
eternity, the “pains of childbirth” must also be eternal. All this is
what the word Dionysus signifies: I know of no higher symbolism than
this Greek symbolism, this symbolism of the Dionysian phenomenon. In
it the profoundest instinct of life, the instinct that guarantees the
future of life and life eternal, is understood religiously,—the road
to life itself, procreation, is pronounced _holy,_ ... It was only
Christianity which, with its fundamental resentment against life, made
something impure out of sexuality: it flung _filth_ at the very basis,
the very first condition of our life.
The psychology of orgiasm conceived as the feeling of a superabundance
of vitality and strength, within the scope of which even pain _acts
as a stimulus,_ gave me the key to the concept _tragic_ feeling,
which has been misunderstood not only by Aristotle, but also even
more by our pessimists. Tragedy is so far from proving anything in
regard to the pessimism of the Greeks, as Schopenhauer maintains,
that it ought rather to be considered as the categorical repudiation
and _condemnation_ thereof. The saying of Yea to life, including
even its most strange and most terrible problems, the will to life
rejoicing over its own inexhaustibleness in the _sacrifice_ of its
highest types—this is what I called Dionysian, this is what I
divined as the bridge leading to the psychology of the _tragic_ poet.
Not in order to escape from terror and pity, not to purify one’s self
of a dangerous passion by discharging it with vehemence—this is how
Aristotle understood it—but to be far beyond terror and pity and to
be the eternal lust of Becoming itself—that lust which also involves
the _lust of destruction._ And with this I once more come into touch
with the spot from which I once set out—-the “Birth of Tragedy” was
my first transvaluation of all values: with this I again take my stand
upon the soil from out of which my will and my capacity spring—I, the
last disciple of the philosopher Dionysus,—I, the prophet of eternal
recurrence.
“Why so hard!”—said the diamond once unto the charcoal; “are we then
not next of kin?”
“Why so soft? O my brethren; this is my question to you. For are ye
not—my brothers?
“Why so soft, so servile and yielding? Why are your hearts so fond of
denial and self-denial? How is it that so little fate looketh out from
your eyes?
“And if ye will not be men of fate and inexorable, how can ye hope one
day to conquer with me?
“And if your hardness will not sparkle, cut and divide, how can ye hope
one day to create with me?
“For all creators are hard. And it must seem to you blessed to stamp
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,—
—Blessed to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass,—harder
than brass, nobler than brass.—Hard through and through is only the