generations must build on it and become fruitful through it,—in order
that it may grow into a large tree which will shelter all posterity.
What are the two thousand years in which Christianity has maintained
its sway? For the mightiest thought of all many millenniums will be
necessary,—long, long, long will it have to remain puny and weak!
For this thought we do not require thirty years of glory with drums
and fifes, and thirty years of grave-digging followed by an eternity
of macaberesque stillness, as is the case with so many other famous
thoughts.
Simple and well-nigh arid as it is, this thought must not even require
eloquence to uphold it.
Are ye now prepared? Ye must have experienced every form of
scepticism and ye must have wallowed with voluptuousness in ice-cold
baths,—otherwise ye have no right to this thought; I wish to protect
myself against those who are over-ready to believe, likewise against
those who gush over anything! I would defend my doctrine in advance.
It must be the religion of the freest, most cheerful and most sublime
souls, a delightful pastureland somewhere between golden ice and a pure
heaven!
EXPLANATORY NOTES TO “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA”
All goals have been annihilated: valuations are turning against each
other:
People call him good who hearkens to the dictates of his own heart, but
they also call him good who merely does his duty;
People call the mild and conciliating man good, but they also call him
good who is brave, inflexible and severe;
People call him good who does not do violence to himself, but they also
call the heroes of self-mastery good;
People call the absolute friend of truth good-, but they also call him
good who is pious and a transfigurer of things;
People call him good who can obey his own voice, but they also call the
devout man good;
People call the noble and the haughty man good, but also him who does
not despise and who does not assume condescending airs.
People call him good who is kindhearted and who steps out of the way of
broils, but he who thirsts for fight and triumph is also called good;
People call him good who always wishes to be first, but they also call
him good who does not wish to be ahead of anybody in anything.
We possess a powerful store of moral _feelings,_ but we have no goal
for them all. They mutually contradict each other: they have their
origin in different tables of values.
There is a wonderful amount of moral power, but there is no longer any
goal towards which all this power can be directed.
All goals have been annihilated, mankind must give themselves a fresh
goal. It is an error to suppose that they had one: they gave themselves
all the goals they ever had. But the prerequisites of all previous
goals have been annihilated.
Science traces the course of things but points to no goal: what it does
give consists of the fundamental facts upon which the new goal must be
based.
The profound sterility of the nineteenth century. I have not
encountered a single man who really had a new ideal to bring
forward. The character of German music kept me hoping longest, but
in vain. A stronger type in which all our powers are synthetically
correlated—this constitutes my faith.
Apparently everything is decadence. We should so direct this movement
of decline that it may provide the strongest with a new form of
existence.
The dissolution of morality, in its practical consequences, leads