in the whole,—there is nothing that could judge, measure, compare,
and condemn our existence, for that would mean judging, measuring,
comparing and condemning the whole. _But there is nothing outside the
whole!_ The fact that no one shall any longer be made responsible, that
the nature of existence may not be traced to a _causa prima_, that the
world is an entity neither as a sensorium nor as a spirit—_this alone
is the great deliverance_,—thus alone is the innocence of Becoming
restored.... The concept “God” has been the greatest objection to
existence hitherto.... We deny God, we deny responsibility in God: thus
alone do we save the world.—
THE “IMPROVERS” OF MANKIND
You are aware of my demand upon philosophers, that they should take
up a stand Beyond Good and Evil,—that they should have the illusion
of the moral judgment beneath them. This demand is the result of a
point of view which I was the first to formulate: _that there are no
such things as moral facts._ Moral judgment has this in common with
the religious one, that it believes in realities which are not real.
Morality is only an interpretation of certain phenomena: or, more
strictly speaking, a misinterpretation of them. Moral judgment, like
the religious one, belongs to a stage of ignorance in which even the
concept of reality, the distinction between real and imagined things,
is still lacking: so that truth, at such a stage, is applied to a host
of things which to-day we call “imaginary.” That is why the moral
judgment must never be taken quite literally: as such it is sheer
nonsense. As a sign code, however, it is invaluable: to him at least
who knows, it reveals the most valuable facts concerning cultures and
inner conditions, which did not know enough to “understand” themselves.
Morality is merely a sign-language, simply symptomatology: one must
already know what it is all about in order to turn it to any use.
Let me give you one example, quite provisionally. In all ages there
have been people who wished to “improve” mankind: this above all
is what was called morality. But the most different tendencies
are concealed beneath the same word. Both the taming of the beast
man, and the rearing of a particular type of man, have been called
“improvement”: these zoological _termini,_ alone, represent real
things—real things of which the typical “improver,” the priest,
naturally knows nothing, and will know nothing. To call the taming
of an animal “improving” it, sounds to our ears almost like a joke.
He who knows what goes on in menageries, doubts very much whether an
animal is improved in such places. It is certainly weakened, it is
made less dangerous, and by means of the depressing influence of fear,
pain, wounds, and hunger, it is converted into a sick animal. And the
same holds good of the tamed man whom the priest has “improved.” In
the early years of the Middle Ages, during which the Church was most
distinctly and above all a menagerie, the most beautiful examples of
the “blond beast” were hunted down in all directions,—the noble
Germans, for instance, were “improved.” But what did this “improved”
German, who had been lured to the monastery look like after the
process? He looked like a caricature of man, like an abortion: he had
become a “sinner,” he was caged up, he had been imprisoned behind a
host of apparling notions. He now lay there, sick, wretched, malevolent
even toward himself: full of hate for the instincts of life, full of