another one must be striven after.
We must let ourselves be taught by the evil, and allow them an
opportunity of a contest. We must make use of the degenerate—The right
of punishment will consist in this, that the offender may be used as
an experimental subject (in dietetics): this is the consecration of
punishment, that one man be used for the highest needs of a future
being.
We protect our new community because it is the bridge to our ideal of
the future And for it we work and let others work.
The measure and mean must be found in striving to attain to something
beyond mankind: the highest and strongest kind of man must be
discovered! The highest tendency must be represented continually
in small things:—perfection, maturity, rosy-cheeked health, mild
discharges of power. Just as an artist works, must we apply ourselves
to our daily task and bring ourselves to perfection in everything we
do. We must be honest in acknowledging our real motives to ourselves,
as is becoming in the mighty man.
No impatience! Superman is our next stage and to this end, to this
limit, moderation and manliness are necessary.
Mankind must surpass itself, as the Greeks did—and no fleshless
fantasies must be indulged. The higher mind which is associated with a
sickly and nervous character must be suppressed. The goal: the higher
culture of the whole body and not only of the brain.
“Man is something that must be surpassed”:—it is a matter of tempo:
the Greeks were wonderful, there was no haste about them.—My
predecessors: Heraclitus, Empedocles, Spinoza, Goethe.
1. Dissatisfaction with ourselves. An antidote to repentance.
The transformation of temperament (_e.g.,_ by means of inorganic
substances). Good will to this dissatisfaction. We should wait for our
thirst and let it become great in order to discover its source.
2. Death must be transformed into a means of victory and triumph.
3. The attitude towards disease. Freedom where death is concerned.
4. The love of the sexes is a means to an ideal (it is the striving of
a being to perish through his opposite). The love for a suffering deity.
5. Procreation is the holiest of all things. Pregnancy, the creation of
a woman and a man, who wish to enjoy their unity, and erect a monument
to it by means of a child.
6. Pity as a danger. Circumstances must be created which enable
everyone to be able to help himself, and which leave him to choose
whether he would be helped.
7. Education must be directed at making men evil, at developing their
inner devil.
9. “The maintenance of the species,” and the thought of eternal
recurrence.
Principal doctrine. We must strive to make every stage one of
perfection, and rejoice therein,—we must make no leaps!
In the first place, the promulgation of laws. After the Superman the
doctrine of eternal recurrence will strike us with horror: Now it is
endurable.
Life itself created this thought which is the most oppressive for life.
Life wishes to get beyond its greatest obstacle I
We must desire to perish in order to arise afresh,—from one day to
the other. Wander through a hundred souls,—let that be thy life and
thy fate! And then finally: desire to go through the whole process once
more!
The highest thing of all would be for us to be able to endure our
immortality.
The moment in which I begot recurrence is immortal, for the sake of
that moment alone I will endure recurrence.
The teaching of eternal recurrence—it is at first oppressive to the