are confounded; as truth is confounded with the effect of that which is
believed to be true; or a certain state of consciousness is confounded
with the chain of causes which brought it about.
_The Error of Free-Will._ At present we no longer have any mercy upon
the concept “free-will”: we know only too well what it is—the most
egregious theological trick that has ever existed for the purpose of
making mankind “responsible” in a theological manner,—that is to
say, to make mankind dependent upon theologians. I will now explain
to you only the psychology of the whole process of inculcating the
sense of responsibility. Wherever men try to trace responsibility
home to anyone, it is the instinct of punishment and of the desire
to judge which is active. Becoming is robbed of its innocence when
any particular condition of things is traced to a will, to intentions
and to responsible actions. The doctrine of the will was invented
principally for the purpose of punishment,—that is to say, with
the intention of tracing guilt. The whole of ancient psychology,
or the psychology of the will, is the outcome of the fact that its
originators, who were the priests at the head of ancient communities,
wanted to create for themselves a right to administer punishments—or
the right for God to do so. Men were thought of as “free” in order that
they might be judged and punished—in order that they might be held
guilty: consequently every action had to be regarded as voluntary,
and the origin of every action had to be imagined as lying in
consciousness(—in this way the most fundamentally fraudulent character
of psychology was established as the very principle of psychology
itself). Now that we have entered upon the opposite movement, now that
we immoralists are trying with all our power to eliminate the concepts
of guilt and punishment from the world once more, and to cleanse
psychology, history, nature and all social institutions and customs
of all signs of those two concepts, we recognise no more radical
opponents than the theologians, who with their notion of “a moral order
of things,” still continue to pollute the innocence of Becoming with
punishment and guilt Christianity is the metaphysics of the hangman.
What then, alone, can our teaching be?—That no one gives man his
qualities, neither God, society, his parents, his ancestors, nor
himself (—this nonsensical idea which is at last refuted here, was
taught as “intelligible freedom” by Kant, and perhaps even as early
as Plato himself). No one is responsible for the fact that he exists
at all, that he is constituted as he is, and that he happens to be in
certain circumstances and in a particular environment. The fatality of
his being cannot be divorced from the fatality of all that which has
been and will be. This is not the result of an individual intention,
of a will, of an aim, there is no attempt at attaining to any “ideal
man,” or “ideal happiness” or “ideal morality” with him,—it is absurd
to wish him to be careering towards some sort of purpose. _We_ invented
the concept “purpose”; in reality purpose is altogether lacking. One
is necessary, one is a piece of fate, one belongs to the whole, one is
in the whole,—there is nothing that could judge, measure, compare,
and condemn our existence, for that would mean judging, measuring,
comparing and condemning the whole. _But there is nothing outside the
whole!_ The fact that no one shall any longer be made responsible, that