obtains that he who possesses them is a different person from him who
is _acquiring_ them. Everything good is an inheritance: that which is
not inherited is imperfect, it is simply a beginning. In Athens at
the time of Cicero—who expresses his surprise at the fact—the men
and youths were by far superior in beauty to the women: but what hard
work and exertions the male sex had for centuries imposed upon itself
in the service of beauty! We must not be mistaken in regard to the
method employed here: the mere discipline of feelings and thoughts
is little better than nil (—it is in this that the great error of
German culture, which is quite illusory, lies): the _body_ must be
persuaded first. The strict maintenance of a distinguished and tasteful
demeanour, the obligation of frequenting only those who do not “let
themselves go,” is amply sufficient to render one distinguished and
tasteful: in two or three generations everything has already _taken
deep root._ The fate of a people and of humanity is decided according
to whether they begin culture at the _right place—not_ at the “soul”
(as the fatal superstition of the priests and half-priests would have
it): the right place is the body, demeanour, diet, physiology—the rest
follows as the night the day.... That is why the Greeks remain the
_first event in culture_—they knew and they _did_ what was needful.
Christianity with its contempt of the body is the greatest mishap that
has ever befallen mankind.
_Progress in my sense._—I also speak of a “return to nature,” although
it is not a process of going back but of going up—up into lofty, free
and even terrible nature and naturalness; such a nature as can play
with great tasks and _may_ play with them.... To speak in a _parable._
Napoleon was an example of a “return to nature,” as I understand it
(for instance _in rebus tacticis,_ and still more, as military experts
know, in strategy). But Rousseau—whither did he want to return?
Rousseau this first modern man, idealist and _canaille_ in one person;
who was in need of moral “dignity,” in order even to endure the sight
of his own person,—ill with unbridled vanity and wanton self-contempt;
this abortion, who planted his tent on the threshold of modernity,
also wanted a “return to nature”; but, I ask once more, whither did
he wish to return? I hate Rousseau, even _in_ the Revolution itself:
the latter was the historical expression of this hybrid of idealist
and _canaille._ The bloody farce which this Revolution ultimately
became, its “immorality,” concerns me but slightly; what I loathe
however is its Rousseauesque _morality_—the so-called “truths” of the
Revolution, by means of which it still exercises power and draws all
flat and mediocre things over to its side. The doctrine of equality!
... But there is no more deadly poison than this; for it _seems_ to
proceed from the very lips of justice, whereas in reality it draws
the curtain down on all justice.... “To equals equality, to unequals
inequality”—that would be the real speech of justice and that which
follows from it “Never make unequal things equal.” The fact that so
much horror and blood are associated with this doctrine of equality,
has lent this “modern idea” _par excellence_ such a halo of fire and
glory, that the Revolution as a drama has misled even the most noble
minds.—That after all is no reason for honouring it the more.—I can
see only one who regarded it as it should be regarded—that is to say,
with _loathing;_ I speak of Goethe.