unlearned the love of his people because he has learned to love many
peoples,—the good European.
2. The gloomy, ambitious son of the people, shy, lonely, and ready for
anything,—who chooses rather to be alone than to be a destroyer,—he
offers himself as an instrument.
3. The ugliest man, who is obliged to adorn himself (historical sense)
and who is always in search of a new garment: he desires to make his
appearance becoming, and finally retires into solitude in order not to
be seen, he is ashamed of himself.
4. He who honours facts (“the brain of a leech”), the most subtle
intellectual conscience, and because he has it in excess, a guilty
conscience,—he wants to get rid of himself.
5. The poet, who at bottom thirsts, for savage freedom,—he chooses
loneliness and the severity of knowledge.
6. The discoverer of new intoxicants,—the musician, the sorcerer, who
finally drops on his knees before a loving heart and says: “Not to me
do I wish to lead you but yonder to him.”
Those who are sober to excess and who have a yearning for intoxication
which they do not gratify. The Supersobersides.
7. Genius (as an attack of insanity), becoming frozen through lack of
love: “I am neither a genius nor a god.” Great tenderness: “people must
show him more love!”
8. The rich man who has given everything away and who asks everybody:
“Have you anything you do not want? give me some of it!” as a beggar.
9. The Kings who renounce dominion: “we seek him who is more worthy
to rule”—against “equality”: the great man is lacking, consequently
reverence is lacking too.
11. The pessimistic soothsayer who detects fatigue everywhere.
14. The woman (seeks the man).
15. The envious emaciated toiler and _arriviste.
16. The good,  } and their mad fancy:
17. The pious,  } “For God” that
18. The self-centred and } means “For me.”
saints,
“I gave you the most weighty thought: maybe mankind will perish through
it, perhaps also mankind will be elevated through it inasmuch as by
its means the elements which are hostile to life will be overcome and
eliminated.” “Ye must not chide Life, but yourselves!”—The destiny
of higher man is to be a creator. The organisation of higher men, the
education of the future ruler. “YE must rejoice in your superior power
when ye rule and when ye form anew.” “Not only man but Superman will
recur eternally!”
The typical suffering of the reformer and also his consolations. The
seven solitudes.
He lives as though he were beyond all ages: his loftiness allows him to
have intercourse with the anchorites and the misunderstood of every age.
Only his beauty is his defence. He lays his hands on the next thousand
years.
His love increases as he sees the impossibility of avoiding the
affliction of pain with it.
Zarathustra’s mood is not one of mad impatience for Superman! It is
peaceful, it can wait: but all action has derived some purpose from
being the road and means thither,—and must be done well and perfectly.
The repose of the great stream! Consecration of the smallest thing.
All unrest, and violent longing, all loathing should be presented in
the third part and be overcome! The gentleness, and mildness, &c, in
the first and second parts are both signs of a power which is not yet
self-reliant!
With the recovery of Zarathustra, Cæsar stands there inexorable
and kind:—the gulf separating creation, goodness, and wisdom is
annihilated.
Clearness, peace, no exaggerated craving, happiness in the moment which
is properly occupied and immortalised!