as by preserving all that is miserable, it is the principal agent in
promoting decadence,—pity exhorts people to nothing, to _nonentity!_
But they do not say “_nonentity_” they say “Beyond,” or “God,” or “the
true life”; or Nirvana, or Salvation, or Blessedness, instead. This
innocent rhetoric, which belongs to the realm of the religio-moral
idiosyncrasy, immediately appears to be _very much less innocent_ if
one realises what the tendency is which here tries to drape itself in
the mantle of sublime expressions—the tendency of hostility to life.
Schopenhauer was hostile to life: that is why he elevated pity to a
virtue.... Aristotle, as you know, recognised in pity a morbid and
dangerous state, of which it was wise to rid one’s self from time to
time by a purgative: he regarded tragedy as a purgative. For the sake
of the instinct of life, it would certainly seem necessary to find some
means of lancing any such morbid and dangerous accumulation of pity, as
that which possessed Schopenhauer (and unfortunately the whole of our
literary and artistic decadence as well, from St Petersburg to Paris,
from Tolstoi to Wagner), if only to make it _burst...._ Nothing is
more unhealthy in the midst of our unhealthy modernity, than Christian
pity. To be doctors _here,_ to be inexorable _here,_ to wield the knife
effectively _here,—_ all this is our business, all this is _our_
kind of love to our fellows, this is what makes _us_ philosophers, us
hyperboreans!—
It is necessary to state whom we regard as our antithesis:—the
theologians, and all those who have the blood of theologians in their
veins—the whole of our philosophy.... A man must have had his very
nose upon this fatality, or better still he must have experienced it
in his own soul; he must almost have perished through it, in order
to be unable to treat this matter lightly (—the free-spiritedness
of our friends the naturalists and physiologists is, in my opinion,
a _joke,_—what they lack in these questions is passion, what they
lack is having suffered from these questions—). This poisoning
extends much further than people think: I unearthed the “arrogant”
instinct of the theologian, wherever nowadays people feel themselves
idealists,—wherever, thanks to superior antecedents, they claim the
right to rise above reality and to regard it with suspicion.... Like
the priest the idealist has every grandiloquent concept in his hand
(—and not only in his hand!), he wields them all with kindly contempt
against the “understanding,” the “senses,” “honours,” “decent living,”
“science”; he regards such things as _beneath_ him, as detrimental and
seductive forces, upon the face of which, “the Spirit” moves in pure
absoluteness:—as if humility, chastity, poverty, in a word _holiness,_
had not done incalculably more harm to life hitherto, than any sort of
horror and vice.... Pure spirit is pure falsehood.... As long as the
priest, the _professional_ denier, calumniator and poisoner of life, is
considered as the _highest_ kind of man, there can be no answer to the
question, what _is_ truth? Truth has already been turned topsy-turvy,
when the conscious advocate of nonentity and of denial passes as the
representative of “truth.”
It is upon this theological instinct that I wage war. I find traces
of it everywhere. Whoever has the blood of theologians in his veins,
stands from the start in a false and dishonest position to all things.
The pathos which grows out of this state, is called _Faith:_ that is
to say, to shut one’s eyes once and for all, in order not to suffer