in human relations and in the reciprocity of duties; much industry and
much perseverance—and a certain inherited soberness which is much more
in need of a spur than of a brake. Let me add that in this country
people still obey without feeling that obedience humiliates. And no one
despises his opponent.
You observe that it is my desire to be fair to the Germans: and in this
respect I should not like to be untrue to myself,—I must therefore
also state my objections to them. It costs a good deal to attain to a
position of power; for power _stultifies._ The Germans—they were once
called a people of thinkers: do they really think at all at present?
Nowadays the Germans are bored by intellect, they mistrust intellect;
politics have swallowed up all earnestness for really intellectual
things—“Germany, Germany above all.”[1] I fear this was the death-blow
to German philosophy. “Are there any German philosophers? Are there any
German poets? Are there any good German books?” people ask me abroad. I
blush; but with that pluck which is peculiar to me, even in moments of
desperation, I reply: “Yes, Bismarck!”—Could I have dared to confess
what books _are_ read to-day? Cursed instinct of mediocrity!—
What might not German intellect have been!—who has not thought sadly
upon this question! But this nation has deliberately stultified itself
for almost a thousand years: nowhere else have the two great European
narcotics, alcohol and Christianity, been so viciously abused as in
Germany. Recently a third opiate was added to the list, one which in
itself alone would have sufficed to complete the ruin of all subtle
and daring intellectual animation, I speak of music, our costive and
constipating German music. How much peevish ponderousness, paralysis,
dampness, dressing-gown languor, and beer is there not in German
intelligence!
How is it really possible that young men who consecrate their whole
lives to the pursuit of intellectual ends, should not feel within them
the first instinct of intellectuality, the _self-preservative instinct
of the intellect_—and should drink beer? The alcoholism of learned
youths does not incapacitate them for becoming scholars—a man quite
devoid of intellect may be a great scholar,—but it is a problem in
every other respect. Where can that soft degeneracy not be found, which
is produced in the intellect by beer! I once laid my finger upon a case
of this sort, which became almost famous,—the degeneration of our
leading German free-spirit, the _clever_ David Strauss, into the author
of a suburban gospel and New Faith. Not in vain had he sung the praises
of “the dear old brown liquor” in verse—true unto death.
I have spoken of German intellect. I have said that it is becoming
coarser and shallower. Is that enough?—In reality something very
different frightens me, and that is the ever steady decline of
German earnestness, German profundity, and German passion in things
intellectual. Not only intellectuality, but also pathos has altered.
From time to time I come in touch with German universities; what
an extraordinary atmosphere prevails among their scholars! what
barrenness! and what self-satisfied and lukewarm intellectuality! For
any one to point to German science as an argument against me would show
that he grossly misunderstood my meaning, while it would also prove
that he had not read a word of my writings. For seventeen years I
have done little else than expose the de-intellectualising influence
of our modern scientific studies. The severe slavery to which every
individual nowadays is condemned by the enormous range covered by the
sciences, is the chief reason why fuller, richer and profounder natures