thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against
them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.” (Mark vi.
11.)—_How evangelical!..._
“And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in
me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he were cast into the sea.” (Mark ix. 42.)—How _evangelical!..._
“And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it fa better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
cast into hell fire: where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.” (Mark ix. 47, 48.)—The eye is not precisely what is meant
in this passage....
“Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
come with power.” (Mark ix. 1.)—Well _lied,_ lion![6] ...
“Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. _For_ ...” (_A psychologist’s comment._ Christian
morality is refuted by its “For’s”: its “reasons” refute,—this is
Christian.) (Mark viii. 34.)
“Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged.” (Matthew vii. I, 2.)—What a strange notion of
justice on the part of a “just” judge!...
“For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
more _than others?_ do not even the publicans so?” (Matthew v. 46, 47.)
The principle of “Christian love”: it insists upon being _well paid_....
“But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.” (Matthew vi. 15.)—Very compromising for the
“Father” in question.
“But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.” (Matthew vi. 33)—“All these
things”—that is to say, food, clothing, all the necessities of life.
To use a moderate expression, this is an _error ..._. Shortly before
this God appears as a tailor, at least in certain cases....
“Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward
_is_ great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto
the prophets.” (Luke vi. 23.)—_Impudent_ rabble! They dare to compare
themselves with the prophets....
“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God and _that_ the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, _him shall God
destroy;_ for the temple of God is holy, which _temple ye are._” (St
Paul, I Corinthians iii. 16, 17.)—One cannot have too much contempt
for this sort of thing....
“Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?”
(St Paul, I Corinthians vi. 2.)—Unfortunately this is not merely the
speech of a lunatic.... This _appalling impostor_ proceeds thus: “Know
ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to
this life?”
“Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe ... not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble _are called;_