purpose, so does mankind presuppose a creature which is not yet formed
but which provides the aim of life. This is the freedom of all will.
Love, reverence, yearning for perfection, longing, all these things are
inherent in a purpose.
My desire: to bring forth creatures which stand sublimely above the
whole species man: and to sacrifice “one’s neighbours” and oneself to
this end.
The morality which has existed hitherto was limited within the confines
of the species: all moralities that have existed hitherto have been
useful in the first place in order to give unconditional stability to
this species: once this has been achieved the aim can be elevated.
One movement is absolute; it is nothing more than the levelling down of
mankind, great ant-organisations, &c.
The other movement, my movement, is conversely the accentuation of all
contrasts and gulfs, and the elimination of equality, together with the
creation of supremely powerful creatures.
The first movement brings forth the last man, my movement brings forth
the Superman. It is by no means the goal to regard the latter as the
master of the first: two races ought to exist side by side,—separated
as far asunder as possible; the one, like the Epicurean gods, not
concerning themselves in the least with the others.
The opposite of the Superman is the last man: I created him
simultaneously with the former.
The more an individual is free and firm, the more exacting becomes his
love: at last he yearns for Superman, because nothing else is able to
appease his love,
Half-way round the course Superman arises.
Among men I was frightened: among men I desired a host of things and
nothing satisfied me. It was then that I went into solitude and created
Superman. And when I had created him I draped him in the great veil of
Becoming and let the light of midday shine upon him.
“We wish to create a Being,” we all wish to have a hand in it, to love
it. We all want to be pregnant—and to honour and respect ourselves on
that account.
We must have a goal in view of which we may all love each other! All
other goals are only fit for the scrap heap.
The strongest in body and soul are the best—Zarathustra’s fundamental
proposition—; from them is generated that higher morality of the
creator. Man must be regenerated after his own image: this is what he
wants, this is his honesty.
Genius to Zarathustra seems like the incarnation of his thought.
Loneliness for a certain time is necessary in order that a creature
may become completely permeated with his own soul—cured and hard. A
new form of community would be one in which we should assert ourselves
martially. Otherwise the spirit becomes tame. No Epicurean “gardens”
and mere “retirement from the masses.” War (but without powder) between
different thoughts and the hosts who support them I
A new nobility, the result of breeding. Feasts celebrating the
foundation of families.
The day divided up afresh; bodily exercise for all ages. Ἀγών
as a principle.
The love of the sexes as a contest around the principle in becoming and
coming.—Ruling will be taught and practised, its hardness as well as
its mildness. As soon as one faculty is acquired in a masterly manner
another one must be striven after.
We must let ourselves be taught by the evil, and allow them an
opportunity of a contest. We must make use of the degenerate—The right
of punishment will consist in this, that the offender may be used as