every lamentation. One casts one’s afflictions, and, under certain
circumstances, even one’s baseness, in the teeth of those who are
different, as if their condition were an injustice, an _iniquitous_
privilege. “Since I am _a blackguard_ you ought to be one too.” It is
upon such reasoning that revolutions are based.—To bewail one’s lot
is always despicable: it is always the outcome of weakness. Whether
one ascribes one’s afflictions to others or to _one’s self,_ it is all
the same. The socialist does the former, the Christian, for instance,
does the latter. That which is common to both attitudes, or rather
that which is equally ignoble in them both, is the fact that somebody
must be to _blame_ if one suffers—in short that the sufferer drugs
himself with the honey of revenge to allay his anguish. The objects
towards which this lust of vengeance, like a lust of pleasure, are
directed, are purely accidental causes. In all directions the sufferer
finds reasons for cooling his petty passion for revenge. If he is a
Christian, I repeat, he finds these reasons in himself. The Christian
and the Anarchist—both are decadents. But even when the Christian
condemns, slanders, and sullies the world, he is actuated by precisely
the same instinct as that which leads the socialistic workman to curse,
calumniate and cast dirt at society. The last “Judgment” itself is
still the sweetest solace to revenge—revolution, as the socialistic
workman expects it, only thought of as a little more remote.... The
notion of a “Beyond,” as well—why a Beyond, if it be not a means of
splashing mud over a “Here,” over this world? ...
_A Criticism of the Morality of Decadence._—An “altruistic”
morality, a morality under which selfishness withers, is in all
circumstances a bad sign. This is true of individuals and above
all of nations. The best are lacking when selfishness begins to be
lacking. Instinctively to select that which is harmful to one, to be
_lured_ by “disinterested” motives,—these things almost provide the
formula for decadence. “Not to have one’s own interests at heart”
—this is simply a moral fig-leaf concealing a very different fact, a
physiological one, to wit:—“I no longer know how to find what is to my
interest.”... Disintegration of the instincts!—All is up with man when
he becomes altruistic.—Instead of saying ingenuously “I am no longer
any good,” the lie of morality in the decadent’s mouth says: “Nothing
is any good,—life is no good.”—A judgment of this kind ultimately
becomes a great danger; for it is infectious, and it soon flourishes
on the polluted soil of society with tropical luxuriance, now as a
religion (Christianity), anon as a philosophy (Schopenhauerism). In
certain circumstances the mere effluvia of such a venomous vegetation,
springing as it does out of the very heart of putrefaction, can poison
life for thousands and thousands of years.
_A moral for doctors._—The sick man is a parasite of society. In
certain cases it is indecent to go on living. To continue to vegetate
in a state of cowardly dependence upon doctors and special treatments,
once the meaning of life, the right to life, has been lost, ought to
be regarded with the greatest contempt by society. The doctors, for
their part, should be the agents for imparting this contempt,—they
should no longer prepare prescriptions, but should every day administer
a fresh dose of _disgust_ to their patients. A new responsibility
should be created, that of the doctor—the responsibility of ruthlessly
suppressing and eliminating _degenerate_ life, in all cases in which
the highest interests of life itself, of ascending life, demand such