Zarathustra defines the attitude towards law, inasmuch as he suppresses
the law of laws which is morality.
Laws as the backbone They must be worked at and created, by being
fulfilled. The slavish attitude which has reigned hitherto towards law!
The self-overcoming of Zarathustra as the prototype of mankind’s
self-overcoming for the benefit of Superman. To this end the overcoming
of morality is necessary.
The type of the lawgiver, his development and his suffering. What is
the purpose of giving laws at all?
Zarathustra is the herald who calls forth many lawgivers.
_Individual instruments._
1. The Commanders, the mighty—who do not love, unless it be that they
love the images according to which they create. The rich in vitality,
the versatile, the free, who overcome that which is extant
2. The obedient, the “emancipated”—love and reverence constitute their
happiness, they have a sense of what is higher (their deficiencies are
made whole by the sight of the lofty).
3. The slaves, the order of “henchmen”—: they must be made
comfortable, they must cultivate pity for one another.
The giver, the creator, the teacher—these are preludes of the ruler.
All virtue and all self-mastery has only one purpose: that of preparing
for the rule!
Every sacrifice that the ruler makes is rewarded a hundredfold.
How much does not the warrior, the prince, the man who is responsible
for himself, sacrifice!—this should be highly honoured.
The terrible task of the ruler who educates himself:—the kind of man
and people over which he will rule must be forecast in him: it is in
himself therefore that he must first have become a ruler!
The great educator like nature must elevate obstacles in order that
these may be overcome.
The new teachers as preparatory stages for the highest Architect (they
must impose their type on things).
Institutions may be regarded as the after effects of great individuals
and the means of giving great individuals root and soil—until the
fruit ultimately appears.
As a matter of fact mankind is continually trying to be able to
dispense with great individuals by means of corporations, &c But they
are utterly dependent upon such great individuals for their ideal.
The eudæmonistic and social ideals lead men backwards,—it may be that
they aim at a very useful working class,—they are creating the ideal
slave of the future, the lower caste which must on no account be
lacking!
Equal rights for all!—this is the most extraordinary form of
injustice, for with it the highest men do not get their due.
It is not a matter of the rights of the stronger, for strong and weak
are alike in this, that they all extend their power as far as they can.
A new form of estimating man: above all the question:
How manifold are his instincts?
How great is his capacity for communication and assimilation?
The ruler as the highest type.
Zarathustra rejoices that the war of the classes is at last over,
and that now at length the time is ripe for an order of rank among
individuals. His hatred of the democratic system of levelling is only
a blind; as a matter of fact he is very pleased that this has gone so
far. Now he can perform his task.—
Hitherto his doctrines had been directed only at the ruling caste of
the future. These lords of the earth must now take the place of God,
and must create for themselves the profound and absolute confidence
of those they rule. Their new holiness, their renunciation of
happiness and ease, must be their first principle. To the lowest they