adultery, incest, and crime (—this is the necessary consequence of the
idea of breeding). Their clothes shall consist only of the rags torn
from corpses, their vessels shall be the fragments of broken pottery,
their ornaments shall be made of old iron, and their religion shall be
the worship of evil spirits; without rest they shall wander from place
to place. They are forbidden to write from left to right or to use
their right hand in writing: the use of the right hand and writing from
left to right are reserved to people of virtue, to people of race.”
These regulations are instructive enough: we can see in them the
absolutely pure and primeval humanity of the Aryans,—we learn that
the notion “pure blood,” is the reverse of harmless. On the other hand
it becomes clear among which people the hatred, the Chandala hatred
of this humanity has been immortalised, among which people it has
become religion and genius. From this point of view the gospels are
documents of the highest value; and the Book of Enoch is still more
so. Christianity as sprung from Jewish roots and comprehensible only
as grown upon this soil, represents the counter-movement against that
morality of breeding, of race and of privilege:—it is essentially an
anti-Aryan religion: Christianity is the transvaluation of all Aryan
values, the triumph of Chandala values, the proclaimed gospel of the
poor and of the low, the general insurrection of all the down-trodden,
the wretched, the bungled and the botched, against the “race,”—the
immortal revenge of the Chandala as the _religion of love._
The morality of breeding and the morality of taming, in the means which
they adopt in order to prevail, are quite worthy of each other: we may
lay down as a leading principle that in order to create morality a
man must have the absolute will to immorality. This is the great and
strange problem with which I have so long been occupied: the psychology
of the “Improvers” of mankind. A small, and at bottom perfectly
insignificant fact, known as the “_pia fraus_,” first gave me access
to this problem: the _pia fraus_, the heirloom of all philosophers and
priests who “improve” mankind. Neither Manu, nor Plato, nor Confucius,
nor the teachers of Judaism and Christianity, have ever doubted their
right to falsehood. They have never doubted their right to quite a
number of other things To express oneself in a formula, one might
say:—all means which have been used heretofore with the object of
making man moral, were through and through immoral.
THINGS THE GERMANS LACK
Among Germans at the present day it does not suffice to have intellect;
one is actually forced to appropriate it, to lay claim to it.
Maybe I know the Germans, perhaps I may tell them a few home-truths.
Modern Germany represents such an enormous store of inherited and
acquired capacity, that for some time it might spend this accumulated
treasure even with some prodigality. It is no superior culture that has
ultimately become prevalent with this modern tendency, nor is it by any
means delicate taste, or noble beauty of the instincts; but rather a
number of virtues more manly than any that other European countries can
show. An amount of good spirits and self-respect, plenty of firmness
in human relations and in the reciprocity of duties; much industry and
much perseverance—and a certain inherited soberness which is much more
in need of a spur than of a brake. Let me add that in this country
people still obey without feeling that obedience humiliates. And no one