more!
The highest thing of all would be for us to be able to endure our
immortality.
The moment in which I begot recurrence is immortal, for the sake of
that moment alone I will endure recurrence.
The teaching of eternal recurrence—it is at first oppressive to the
more noble souls and apparently a means of weeding them out,—then the
inferior and less sensitive natures would remain over! “This doctrine
must be suppressed and Zarathustra killed.”
The hesitation of the disciples. “We are already able to bear with this
doctrine, but we should destroy the many by means of it!”
Zarathustra laughs: “Ye shall be the hammer: I laid this hammer in your
hands.”
I do not speak to you as I speak to the people. The highest thing for
them would be to despise and to annihilate themselves: the next highest
thing would be for them to despise and annihilate each other.
“My will to do good compels me to remain silent. But my will to the
Superman bids me speak and sacrifice even my friends.”
“I would fain form and transform you, how could I endure things
otherwise!”
The history of higher man. The rearing of the better man is
incalculably more painful. The ideal of the necessary sacrifice which
it involves, as in the case of Zarathustra, should be demonstrated: A
man should leave his home, his family and his native land. Live under
the scorn of the prevailing morality. The anguish of experiments and
errors. The solution of all the joys offered by the older ideals (they
are now felt to be partly hostile and partly strange).
What is it which gives a meaning, a value, an importance to things?
It is the creative heart which yearns and which created out of this
yearning. It created joy and woe. It wanted to sate itself also with
woe. Every kind of pain that man or beast has suffered, we must take
upon ourselves and bless, and have a goal whereby such suffering would
acquire some meaning.
Principal doctrine: the transfiguration of pain into a blessing, and of
poison into food, lies in our power. The will to suffering.
Concerning heroic greatness as the only state of pioneers. (A yearning
for utter ruin as a means of enduring one’s existence.)
We must not desire one state only; we must rather desire to be
periodical creatures—like existence.
Absolute indifference to other people’s opinions (because we know their
weights and measures), but their opinions of themselves should be the
subject of pity.
Disciples must unite three qualities in themselves: they must be
true, they must be able and willing to be communicative, they must
have profound insight into each other.
All kinds of higher men and their oppression and blighting (as a case
in point, Duhring, who was ruined by isolation)—on the whole, this
is the fate of higher men to-day, they seem to be a species that is
condemned to die out: this fact seems to come to Zarathustra’s ears
like a great cry for help. All kinds of insane degenerations of higher
natures seem to approach him (nihilism for instance).
_Higher Men who come to Zarathustra in Despair._
Temptations to return prematurely to the world—thanks to the
provocation of one’s sympathies.
1. The rolling stone, the homeless one, the wanderer:—he who has
unlearned the love of his people because he has learned to love many
peoples,—the good European.
2. The gloomy, ambitious son of the people, shy, lonely, and ready for
anything,—who chooses rather to be alone than to be a destroyer,—he
offers himself as an instrument.