in vain. A stronger type in which all our powers are synthetically
correlated—this constitutes my faith.
Apparently everything is decadence. We should so direct this movement
of decline that it may provide the strongest with a new form of
existence.
The dissolution of morality, in its practical consequences, leads
to the atomistic individual, and further to the subdivision of the
individual into a quantity of parts—absolute liquefaction.
That is why a goal is now more than ever necessary; and love, but a new
love.
I say: “As long as your morality hung over me I breathed like one
asphyxiated. That is why I throttled this snake. I wished to live,
consequently it had to die.”
As long as people are still _forced to_ act, that is to say as long as
commands are given, synthesis (the suppression of the moral man) will
not be realised To be unable to be otherwise: instincts and commanding
reason extending beyond any immediate object: the ability to enjoy
one’s own nature in action.
None of them wish to bear the burden of the commander; but they will
perform the most strenuous task if only thou commandest them.
We must overcome the past in ourselves: we must combine the instincts
afresh and direct the whole together to one goal:—an extremely
difficult undertaking! It is not only the evil instincts which have to
be overcome,—the so-called good instincts must be conquered also and
consecrated anew!
No leaps must be made in virtue! But everyone must be given a different
path! Not leading to the highest development of each! Yet everyone may
be a bridge and an example for others.
To help, to pity, to submit and to renounce personal attacks with a
good will,—these things may make even insignificant and superficial
men tolerable to the eye: such men must not be contradicted in their
belief that this good will is “virtue in itself.”
Man makes a deed valuable: but how might a deed make man valuable?
Morality is the concern of those who cannot free themselves from
it: for such people morality therefore belongs to the conditions of
existence. It is impossible to refute conditions of existence: the only
thing one can do is not to have them.
If it were true that life did not deserve to be welcomed, the moral
man, precisely on account of his self-denial and obligingness, would
then be guilty of misusing his fellow to his own personal advantage.
“Love thy neighbour”—this would mean first and foremost: “Let thy
neighbour go his own way”—and it is precisely this kind of virtue that
is the most difficult!
The bad man as the parasite. We must not be merely feasters and
gourmets of life: this is ignoble.
It is a noble sense which forbids our being only feasters and gourmets
of life—this sense revolts against hedonism—: we want to perform
something in return!—But the fundamental feeling of the masses is that
one must live for nothing,—that is their vulgarity.
The converse valuations hold good for the lower among men: in their
case therefore it is necessary to implant virtues. They must be
elevated above their lives, by means of absolute commands and terrible
taskmasters.
What is required: the new law must be made practicable—and out of its
fulfilment, the overcoming of this law, and higher law, must evolve
Zarathustra defines the attitude towards law, inasmuch as he suppresses
the law of laws which is morality.
Laws as the backbone They must be worked at and created, by being
fulfilled. The slavish attitude which has reigned hitherto towards law!