to disintegration of the will. This is almost the definition of evil,
Everything valuable is instinct—and consequently easy, necessary,
free. Exertion is an objection, the god is characteristically different
from the hero (in my language: light feet are the first attribute of
divinity).
_The error of false causality._ In all ages men have believed that
they knew what a cause was: but whence did we derive this knowledge,
or more accurately, this faith in the fact that we know? Out of the
realm of the famous “inner facts of consciousness,” not one of which
has yet proved itself to be a fact We believed ourselves to be causes
even in the action of the will; we thought that in this matter at
least we caught causality red-handed. No one doubted that all the
_antecedentia_ of an action were to be sought in consciousness, and
could be discovered there—as “motive”—if only they were sought.
Otherwise we should not be free to perform them, we should not have
been responsible for them. Finally who would have questioned that a
thought is caused? that the ego causes the thought? Of these three
“facts of inner consciousness” by means of which causality seemed to
be guaranteed, the first and most convincing is that of the will as
cause; the conception of consciousness (“spirit”) as a cause, and
subsequently that of the ego (the “subject”) as a cause, were merely
born afterwards, once the causality of the will stood established
as “given,” as a fact of experience. Meanwhile we have come to our
senses. To-day we no longer believe a word of all this. The “inner
world” is full of phantoms and will-o’-the-wisps: the will is one of
these. The will no longer actuates, consequently it no longer explains
anything—all it does is to accompany processes; it may even be absent.
The so-called “motive” is another error. It is merely a ripple on
the surface of consciousness, a side issue of the action, which is
much more likely to conceal than to reveal the _antecedentia_ of the
latter. And as for the ego! It has become legendary, fictional, a
play upon words: it has ceased utterly and completely from thinking,
feeling, and willing! What is the result of it all? There are no such
things as spiritual causes. The whole of popular experience on this
subject went to the devil! That is the result of it all. For we had
blissfully abused that experience, we had built the world upon it as a
world of causes, as a world of will, as a world of spirit. The most
antiquated and most traditional psychology has been at work here, it
has done nothing else: all phenomena were deeds in the light of this
psychology, and all deeds were the result of will; according to it the
world was a complex mechanism of agents, an agent (a “subject”) lay
at the root of all things. Man projected his three “inner facts of
consciousness,” the will, the spirit, and the ego in which he believed
most firmly, outside himself. He first deduced the concept Being out
of the concept Ego, he supposed “things” to exist as he did himself,
according to his notion of the ego as cause. Was it to be wondered at
that later on he always found in things only that which he had laid
in them?—The thing itself, I repeat, the concept thing was merely a
reflex of the belief in the ego as cause. And even your atom, my dear
good Mechanists and Physicists, what an amount of error, of rudimentary