religions, they are akin,—they are religions of decadence,—while
each is separated from the other in the most extraordinary fashion.
For being able to compare them at all, the critic of Christianity is
profoundly grateful to Indian scholars.—Buddhism is a hundred times
more realistic than Christianity,—it is part of its constitutional
heritage to be able to face problems objectively and coolly, it is
the outcome of centuries of lasting philosophical activity. The
concept “God” was already exploded when it appeared. Buddhism is
the only really _positive_ religion to be found in history, even
in its epistemology (which is strict phenomenalism)—it no longer
speaks of the “struggle with _sin_” but fully recognising the true
nature of reality it speaks of the “struggle with _pain._” It already
has—and this distinguishes it fundamentally from Christianity,—the
self-deception of moral concepts beneath it,—to use my own
phraseology, it stands _Beyond Good and Evil._ The two physiological
facts upon which it rests and upon which it bestows its attention
are: in the first place excessive irritability of feeling, which
manifests itself as a refined susceptibility to pain, _and also_ as
super-spiritualisation, an all-too-lengthy sojourn amid concepts and
logical procedures, under the influence of which the personal instinct
has suffered in favour of the “impersonal.” (—Both of these states
will be known to a few of my readers, the objective ones, who, like
myself, will know them from experience.) Thanks to these physiological
conditions, a state of depression set in, which Buddha sought to combat
by means of hygiene. Against it, he prescribes life in the open, a life
of travel; moderation and careful choice in food; caution in regard to
all intoxicating liquor, as also in regard to all the passions which
tend to create bile and to heat the blood; and he deprecates care
either on one’s own or on other people’s account He recommends ideas
that bring one either peace or good cheer,—he invents means whereby
the habit of contrary ideas may be lost He understands goodness—being
good—as promoting health. _Prayer_ is out of the question, as is
also _asceticism;_ there is neither a Categorical Imperative nor any
discipline whatsoever, even within the walls of a monastery (—it is
always possible to leave it if one wants to). All these things would
have been only a means of accentuating the excessive irritability
already referred to. Precisely on this account he does not exhort his
followers to wage war upon those who do not share their views; nothing
is more abhorred in his doctrine than the feeling of revenge, of
aversion, and of resentment (—“not through hostility doth hostility
end”: the touching refrain of the whole of Buddhism....) And in this
he was right; for it is precisely these passions which are thoroughly
unhealthy in view of the principal dietetic object The mental fatigue
which he finds already existent and which expresses itself in
excessive “objectivity” (_i.e._, the enfeeblement of the individual’s
interest—loss of ballast and of “egoism”), he combats by leading
the spiritual interests as well imperatively back to the individual
In Buddha’s doctrine egoism is a duty: the thing which is above all
necessary, _i.e.,_ “how canst thou be rid of suffering” regulates
and defines the whole of the spiritual diet (—let anyone but think
of that Athenian who also declared war upon pure “scientificality,”
Socrates, who made a morality out of personal egoism even in the realm
of problems).
The pre-requisites for Buddhism are a very mild climate, great
gentleness and liberality in the customs of a people and _no_
militarism. The movement must also originate among the higher and