one day to create with me?
“For all creators are hard. And it must seem to you blessed to stamp
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,—
—Blessed to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass,—harder
than brass, nobler than brass.—Hard through and through is only the
noblest.
This new table of values, O my brethren, I set over your heads: Become
hard.”
An Attempted Criticism of Christianity
This book belongs to the very few. Maybe not one of them is yet alive;
unless he be of those who understand my Zarathustra. How _can_ I
confound myself with those who to-day already find a hearing?—Only the
day after to-morrow belongs to me. Some are born posthumously.
I am only too well aware of the conditions under which a man
understands me, and then _necessarily_ understands. He must be
intellectually upright to the point of hardness, in order even to
endure my seriousness and my passion. He must be used to living on
mountain-tops,—and to feeling the wretched gabble of politics and
national egotism _beneath_ him. He must have become indifferent; he
must never inquire whether truth is profitable or whether it may
prove fatal.... Possessing from strength a predilection for questions
for which no one has enough courage nowadays; the courage for the
_forbidden;_ his predestination must be the labyrinth. The experience
of seven solitudes. New ears for new music. New eyes for the most
remote things. A new conscience for truths which hitherto have
remained dumb. And the will to economy on a large scale: to husband
his strength and his enthusiasm.... He must honour himself, he must
love himself; he must be absolutely free with regard to himself....
Very well then! Such men alone are my readers, my proper readers,
my preordained readers: of what account are the rest?—the rest are
simply—humanity.—One must be superior to humanity in power, in
loftiness of soul,—in contempt.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.
Let us look each other in the face. We are hyperboreans,—we know
well enough how far outside the crowd we stand. “Thou wilt find the
way to the Hyperboreans neither by land nor by water”: Pindar already
knew this much about us. Beyond the north, the ice, and death—_our
life, our happiness...._ We discovered happiness; we know the way; we
found the way out of thousands of years of labyrinth. Who _else_ would
have found it?—Not the modern man, surely?—“I do not know where I
am or what I am to do; I am everything that knows not where it is or
what to do,”—sighs the modern man. We were made quite ill by _this_
modernity,—with its indolent peace, its cowardly compromise, and the
whole of the virtuous filth of its Yea and Nay. This tolerance and
_largeur de cœur_ which “forgives” everything because it “understands”
everything, is a Sirocco for us. We prefer to live amid ice than to
be breathed upon by modern virtues and other southerly winds!... We
were brave enough; we spared neither ourselves nor others: but we
were very far from knowing whither to direct our bravery. We were
becoming gloomy; people called us fatalists. _Our_ fate—it was the
abundance, the tension and the storing up of power. We thirsted for
thunderbolts and great deeds; we kept at the most respectful distance
from the joy of the weakling, from “resignation.” ... Thunder was in
our air, that part of nature which we are, became overcast—_for we had
no direction._ The formula of our happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight
line, a goal.